[Music]
when people first encounter these
the the science that we have and also
just the idea of messing with these
intuitions it can be uncomfortable and
some people don't like going down this
path so i just like
like to make a little disclaimer or
or to say that
i think people can feel very out of
control and i mean there's there's
something jarring about learning that
everything the things that feel most
true to you about reality are possibly
not that not structured that way wait
wait till you explain delayed
measurement and people can really lose
their [__] like that's where it's gonna
get interesting we're not even in the
crazy stuff yet
[Music]
hey everyone welcome to impact theory
today's guest is a new york times
bestselling author who is challenging
some of our most fundamental notions of
what it means to be a conscious being
she is an editor and consultant for many
esteemed science writers and she
specializes in making the notoriously
difficult to comprehend topics of
neuroscience and physics accessible to
the masses her writing has not only
appeared on bookshelves far and wide but
it has also been featured by some of the
most prestigious outlets in the world
including the new york times from
best-selling author adam grant to
theoretical physicist sean carroll some
of the brightest minds on the planet
have publicly championed her work her
ideas and her uncanny ability to explain
hard things well so well in fact that in
addition to her groundbreaking work for
adults she's written a very well
received children's book called i wonder
and collaborated with susan kaiser
greenland on mindful games activity
cards she also teaches mindfulness to
students in the inner kids organization
and has taught her techniques to
children as young as four and a half
years old talk about making things
accessible so please help me in
welcoming the author of conscious a
brief guide to the fundamental mystery
of the mind annika harris
what is up welcome
good to see you as well thank you so
much for coming on the show yeah thanks
for having me absolutely i am as awe
inspired by the topics that you cover as
you are
what is would you say your most sort of
awe-inspiring insight into the human
mind
you know i think
i think just the simple insight that
consciousness is as mysterious as it
turns out to be
um
is to me the most aw inspiring piece and
it's really the reason i wrote the book
and there are many reasons but but the
main reason was really
to share this sense of
inspiration and awe at
just how mysterious consciousness is
and many people actually don't realize
that it's one of the great enduring
mysteries so we're all kind of familiar
with looking out into the cosmos and
wondering about black holes in the
beginning of the universe
and is there life you know on other
planets and and these things are
naturally awe-inspiring um and many
people don't realize actually that that
consciousness is on in some ways on
equal footing with these these other
great mysteries um but the difference is
it's here with us in every moment um
and so
there's actually
this um this great mystery this great
awe-inspiring mystery that's with us
in every moment kind of to to be to be
reveled at and to why do you think so
many people miss it
i think part of the reason is that
neuroscience has made so much progress
that i think most people think
some scientist understands it or if they
don't quite understand it they'll
understand it soon
and i think part of it is just that it's
it's kind of something we take for
granted i think
we have always assumed
i think you know in modern times since
we've had modern science we've always
assumed that consciousness is analogous
to something like a light bulb where
it seems miraculous to flip a switch and
and suddenly a room is flooded with
light um but but once you understand the
details once you understand electricity
um and the mechanics of a light bulb um
it's something you can understand it's
not it's not really mysterious um and i
think people a lot of people have
assumed that consciousness is analogous
to that um and there i think there are
many reasons why that that analogy
actually doesn't hold um so if the
analogy of it being like a light bulb
doesn't hold like where do you go from
there and you've always been very
careful to define consciousness yeah
which would probably do that no we
should probably should yeah yeah no i'm
glad you brought that up so the way i'm
using the word consciousness people use
the word in in a variety of ways and
often it makes it a confusing term and
actually
the the best term i think is is
experience to really point to the most
fundamental sense of consciousness that
i'm talking about and that my book is
about and that i think is mysterious
so consciousness simply being experience
whether
there is something that it's like to be
a collection of atoms in the universe so
we often forget that that it's literally
true that we are stardust we are made of
the same ingredients of everything else
in the universe um
and there's this magical fact that when
matter gets configured in in a certain
way um it lights up from the inside that
suddenly there's something that it's
like to be that matter and so many
people use the word consciousness to
kind of talk about higher order
reasoning
self-awareness things like that
but i'm using it in the most in the most
fundamental sense simply
having an experience simply um there's
something it's like to use thomas
nagel's
definition he wrote a famous essay
called what is it like to be a bat
and in that essay he he says an organism
is conscious if there's something that
it's like to be that organism and some
people have a hard time with that
terminology but for me that really kind
of gets gets to the core of of this
simple definition of consciousness and
why it's mysterious one thing you're
you've been very careful to talk about
as well and this is where i first went
so i dive into the book i'm super
interested i'm yeah i'm with you like
let's talk about it yeah and as you
started explaining it i found myself
conflating the notion of being conscious
with high level cognition right and i
saw i was like well like how as you got
into the some of the more like esoteric
pan psychism that maybe um this is all a
field like gravity that consciousness
just sort of is it exists and from that
thing spring forward which is [__]
fascinating and we will for sure talk
about that but i would emphasize maybe
too
yeah no and i'm completely open to it
but i yeah i like to be clear that we
really don't know and i i i'm not
advocating that view i just think it's
actually it's worth it it's worth
exploring and we should be open to it
but no question and one thing i hope
that we get to at some point is the very
fact that that it shouldn't be off
limits to talk about these crazy ideas
and the fact that this is like career
suicide for so many people just so weird
to me yes but before we derail on that
so
teasing out the two concepts i think is
super important because people will not
be able to get into the joys of this
mystery if they
think what they're being asked to
contemplate is that a rock has
um high level cognition because then
they they can't separate because my my
biggest argument is always when someone
starts talking in a way that makes it
sound like you're saying there's
essentially a soul or whatever i'm like
phineas gage homie yeah like and i'm
assuming you know well the story of
phineas gage i actually don't know that
so phineas gage this is um this is so
interesting this is one of my favorite
you talk about so many examples in the
book it it'll immediately be familiar as
just another one of those yes but um
phoenix gage was a railroad worker who
hit a tamping rule oh yes of course yes
some crazy amount like a tea cups tea
cups worth of brain matter but never
loses consciousness yes but forever is
different and they say he went from like
the most likable guy ever to like a
total [__] he could not hold a job
yes and it's just like
yeah is it the same guy like the only
thing that happened was damage to the
brain yes it's fascinating that
we have this intuition somehow that this
isn't the case but of course we know
that our experience
our conscious experience in this moment
and all of the content that's flooding
in through this experience
is a result of brain processing and if
you change the brain the experience
changes the thoughts change the feelings
change it's
it's um it's all correlated i feel like
you you had um
a question that you were getting at
when you brought that example up that i
wanted to answer i felt like it was a
good question so what i want to
when whenever somebody starts talking
about
um
hey there there's there is something
inside of me that isn't my body
and there's great comfort in that for
them
and as somebody who literally my mission
in life is to get people to
get control of their conscious thoughts
maybe even reprogram some of the default
mode network
we should talk about that as well but
like so my mission in life if i'm really
going to put it in like sort of deep
biological terms is to get people to
rewire their default mode network so
their very sense of self is more
productive right so that their identity
their beliefs their value systems at a
neurological level so that they're
getting like this neurochemical response
that drives them towards something
effective right so you can get a
neurological response that drives you
towards destructive behavior or you can
retrain things and and be going in a
positive direction okay right yeah and i
realized yeah sorry i just realized now
that the
the distinction you wanted to make was
between consciousness in this very
fundamental sense that i'm using it in
the book and complex thought correct um
and that we have to be very careful to
not conflate them that that we must
distinguish between the two um for many
reasons even in a human sense we know
that babies at some point the people can
argue about where it comes in but at
some point a baby
that does not have language and who is
not having the types of thoughts you and
i are having or
thinking through anything complicated at
all
is having a conscious experience and
then of course you can go through the
animal kingdom and people tend to agree
and disagree the the more simple the
creature gets but at a pretty simple
level even you know a mouse
something like that
most of us and most neuroscientists
would say yes a mouse is having some
kind of experience it is it's not an
unconscious zombie or robot you know we
we know
that their brains are similar enough to
ours that they're having some type of
experience um and then in in some of
this work we can start to postulate how
far down
an experience actually goes
and so when we do that it's very
important to distinguish consciousness
just
the fact of experience from complex
thought or mind or or anything like that
that it's it's certainly possible to
imagine and feasible to to postulate a
scientific understanding of experience
in a very very minimal form
yes that notion of experience how much
of that do you feel requires
a recognized experience
so by recognizing experience i mean so
you you've said very clearly that um hey
look this whole notion of pan psychism
where
uh
essentially consciousness may be a field
like gravity and that things bring up
through it if that is
um
real then there are uh maybe this is
like sort of little minds coming
together and i'll let you explain that
far better than i can and that we
we can get these um collaborations
between these which will change the
nature of the consciousness but what i
want to tease out is like okay if there
isn't a light switch moment where
something either is or isn't conscious
there definitely seems to be the quality
of that experience changes dramatically
and so when i think about if so i'll
i'll stay in in terms maybe i understand
a little bit better so if of i i just
want to ask a question to see if you're
getting at something that that comes up
a lot which i think is an interesting
question which is more kind of the meta
level like an awareness of being aware
in a sense part of what consciousness is
yes is that your question
okay
um so i would say no
um i think that there's a pure and more
basic form of consciousness that does
not necessarily entail an awareness
of consciousness itself and i think
even within you know life as we know it
in the animal kingdom um i think it's
very likely that there are creatures
um certain insects things like that
where where the brain
processing is just not complex enough
for that type of thinking to take place
but that doesn't mean there's no
experience present and i think some
scientists would argue with this but
there are definitely enough of them that
would agree with me that there is um
the fact of experience needn't entail
anything more than just
whether there's there's something it's
like so i i often will use the example
of a worm we don't know if worms are
conscious or not this is
not something neuroscientists have have
a consensus on but you can imagine it's
not that hard for us to imagine that you
know worm slivering across the ground
has this very very minimal experience
and it either is or it isn't right so
there is something about consciousness
where you can say um it's it is binary
in a sense even though
there's this spectrum once you get on
the spectrum um
where the content can grow and get more
and more complex
but as soon as you get to the end of
that spectrum at its most simple form
and then drop off of it you're talking
about no experience at all so when we
talk about rocks
whether or not we're right we most most
of us assume there's nothing that it's
like to be a rock there's no experience
present there at all but we could
imagine that a worm
um has some felt experience of
its skin against the ground of cold and
warm of you know temperature changing
pressure changing something incredibly
minimal
um and so it's not all easy to rule out
in a case like that um and in that case
you wouldn't have this kind of meta
awareness
so now getting into that
there's one question that i want to
explore which i'm not even sure how to
think of this so
um
at some point where does it
go from just it's fascinating to think
about to this really matters
and is that is there a line in there
where you're drawn to this because you
really think that it matters like with
a.i and things like that or is it just
pure fascination it's definitely both so
i would just start with the
the simple fact and this is really um my
my reasons behind wanting to to write a
book about this are kind of split down
the middle between these two things as
well so first it's a little bit like
what i was talking about before just
um
the fact that being aware be having more
understanding
of not just how mysterious consciousness
is but the specific ways that it's
mysterious
i actually think can bring a lot of joy
to our lives just in the form of awe
and inspiration of that kind
but i know i i am a scientist at heart
even though i'm not a trained scientist
and
i really believe we can get a better
understanding of consciousness i think
it's possible we'll never really be able
where it's you know human brain is not
designed to understand
the the fundamental nature of reality
and we may not be able to get there but
i'm optimistic that we can
and i think
in order for this work to get done one
we have to be willing to have the
conversation that touches a little bit
on on what you wanted to talk about
with it being kind of a taboo subject
once you start postulating some some
more far out ideas so this this actually
brings me to
um the focus of my book which is at its
core challenging our intuitions
and challenging intuitions is a very
important part of the scientific process
um so so the short answer to your
question is
um i think it's wonderful for human
beings to contemplate in the same way
that it's good for us to contemplate all
of the mysteries i also think that
mysteries are really uniting when all of
humanity is facing something that they
don't understand i actually think
there's something really beautiful about
that and it really connects us in a way
and on the other side i actually think
we have a lot to learn and i even think
in some ways we've learned a lot through
modern neuroscience that is so
counter-intuitive that we have not yet
absorbed the implications of what we've
already learned and again this is about
challenging intuitions and how important
this is in the scientific process
so this is true in
any time
we gain new knowledge that's that's
groundbreaking um
there always seems to be this period of
time where we're wrestling with our
intuitions
in everything from
when we finally understood that the
earth is a sphere and not flat
to understanding the germ theory of
disease to
understanding that space and time are
warped by gravity these are all things
that when we discover them when we
encounter them they're so
counter-intuitive there's always this
period of time
when scientists are kind of wrestling
with their intuitions before they can
make progress
because when things
are so counter to our intuitions we have
a hard time accepting them and so you
kind of have to be face the same
evidence over and over again and then
kind of reshape your intuitions in order
to think about the world in this new way
so that the science can progress
um
and so i think we're at a place like
that with consciousness right now so i
think it's really important for us to be
challenging our intuitions about
consciousness and that's really what
what my book does and it begins um with
two questions that i think we have very
strong intuitive answers
um for that then i spend the rest of the
book kind of picking apart to see to see
where it takes us what are those two
intentions
um
so they're related but they're slightly
different questions the first one is
is there evidence
of consciousness in any system on the
outside in the form of behavior or
something else so um in a human brain in
a human and a cat and a dog is there
something we can point to from the
outside such as behavior that will tell
us conclusively that consciousness is
present in that system and most of us
myself included have a very strong
intuitive
response to that which is yes i'm you
know i'm not sure what they what all of
them are what that list is but i can
come up with an easy example
if i'm leaving for work in the morning
and my daughter doesn't want me to go
and she's crying and saying
mommy don't go i think that behavior to
me is is absolutely evidence that she's
having an internal experience that she's
conscious of her emotions and what she's
going through and grief and you know all
of that in that moment
um
and so we all have this and and i think
this gets to the core of of our
intuitions about consciousness and what
we think it is and where we actually
could be wrong and i think
while that's likely
a good way to test if if consciousness
is present i actually think there's a
deeper sense in which that is actually
not evidence at all and we can we can
kind of pick that apart through looking
at different areas of neuroscience and
the second question is similar um
which is is consciousness doing anything
um is it serving a function is it
driving our behavior and again all of us
think yes of course absolutely i
couldn't there's so many things i
couldn't do just you know in my daily
life today i think thinking through
certain choices um
when we have a fear response to
something you know running away from a
dangerous situation my car catches on
fire and i run in the other direction
we feel that consciousness is is truly
motivating so much of our behavior and
that that's the one that i think
is
we now have have modern neuroscience
telling us
that intuition is at least
off if not completely wrong
um and so you need to go into that one
because
some of the examples you give in the
book are crazy town right um i should
say also that when people first
encounter these
the the science that we have and also
just the idea of messing with these
intuitions it can be uncomfortable and
some people don't like going down this
path so i just like
like to make a little disclaimer or
or to say that
i think people can feel
very out of control and i mean there's
there's something jarring about learning
that everything the things that feel
most true to you about reality are
possibly
not that not structured that way wait
wait till you explain delayed
measurement and people can really lose
their [__] like that's where it's going
to get interesting we're not even in the
crazy stuff yet right well i guess
that's why i'm saying this now before
before you drag them into deep water
yeah but what i've what i've learned is
that most people if they're not excited
about it to begin with spending a little
time thinking about it that there
there's a way to kind of come around to
the other side where this actually um is
very freeing that looking that that um
that upending some of these intuitions
is actually
um for lack of a better word kind of
similar to a spiritual experience
there's a positive way to to view all of
this i should say a thousand percent
okay so this this part is really
interesting for me so what is some of
the science that we can look at that
says hey our intuitions about how we
think we are in control probably don't
make sense
and because what i i want to put you and
your idea in context because people
watching this probably don't realize you
wrote a book of heresy like if you were
an academic you'd be lighting your
career on fire
and the fact that you're talking about
this you've privately had people who
just can absolutely not come out and
talk about what you're talking about
um publicly saying thank god somebody is
talking about this because
like you said and this is this is why i
find your work so interesting is
we have to explore this so whether or
not it's right is kind of irrelevant we
have to get outside of the box of our
intuition which the while i don't want
to start here the ultimate example of
that to me is the delayed measurement
experience in physics which freaks me i
cannot tell you how many hours i've
spent thinking about the double slit
experiment like
it's insane yeah and it that is a deeply
spiritual moment for me where i go whoa
my face says the chills right now yeah i
don't understand something yes so
profoundly fundamental that everything
that i'm looking at in the world is not
what i think it is i don't know what
anything is anymore a thousand percent
right so
i should say also just for for your
listeners and viewers that there are now
some wonderful animations online that
explain the double split experiment if
they if they don't know what that is and
they want to spend
the rest of their lives wondering about
it um
it's a hard one to explain it's a hard
one to grasp and now that we have
youtube videos it actually makes it a
lot easier yes
all right before we get there there
there are some sort of double slit type
things with the mind right where binding
comes into play and the conscious mind
taking um ownership of something that it
actually didn't even know about until
the very end walk people through some of
that binding is actually a great place
to start um
just in understanding how the content of
our conscious experience
um is really created by the brain in
ways that that are
behind our intuitions where we wouldn't
necessarily know and binding is a
phenomenon um talked about in
neuroscience and david eagleman is
actually wonderful on this subject and
he he's written and and given talks on
the subject that are fascinating
but simply binding is really
our brains
attempt
and successful attempt
at taking things that are happening in
the real world
at different times and sinking them so
that our present moment experience
is of things in the world happening
at the same time where those signals to
us are actually coming in at different
times so the example in my book i give
is a plane tennis so if you're playing
tennis and you hit the ball with the
racquet
it seems like this is all happening in
one moment but the truth is the sound
waves from the sound of the ball hitting
the racket are traveling at a different
speed um then the light waves of the
light bouncing off the ball and hitting
our our retina and then being processed
by the brain
and same with the sensory experience in
your hand of feeling the ball hit the
racket that's a much slower process than
we're talking about um the
your your nervous system actually
receiving signal through your arm and
our experience is that that all happens
at the same time but the truth is the
sight came
more quickly than the sound and the
sound came more quickly than the
physical sensation and so there's a
process that that we call binding
whereby all of these signals kind of get
woven together in a present moment
experience that gets delivered to your
conscious experience
there are unconscious processes that
then cause you to have to have this
experience
um there are brain disorders that
can interrupt these processes too um so
there's something called agnosia there
are many different types of agnosia um
but it's it's a kind of a failure of the
brain to to do this type of of binding
for us there's finger agnosia where you
cannot tell the difference between two
of your fingers um
sights and sounds can get confused or
not arrive at the same time they're um
have you read much about brussel
bagnosia
so it's like it's where the person can i
see your eyes oh god your eyes are so
familiar your nose but it's not coming
together as a face for them yes i often
tease my wife that she has
browsobagnosia because she can never
recognize famous people but like to me
is that specifically for recognizing
faces it's the face yeah so bro is a
greek word for face right okay so yes
and and i just that was one of the first
times where i began to realize okay whoa
whoa the brain has a lot of different
regions like people um i don't know what
this uh disease is called but certain
brain trauma will lead leave somebody
where they can't detect motion so they
see completely normally yeah but
everything is a snapshot yes so if
they're pouring something it just looks
like frozen liquid and then all of a
sudden the cup is overflowing and
there's like the the essentially refresh
rate on their eyes is so slow yeah that
everything is just these like static
still images right no we're taking a ton
of unconscious brain processes for
granted that we don't realize all of
these things are
um being woven together for us there
there's something called disjunctive
agnosia it's similar to what you're
talking about with the face but these
are you know objects in space you can
recognize all of the different parts you
can recognize the color the shape but
you can't see it as an object you can't
recognize something as a cup
um there are even you know minor
things that can happen where
um
you can recognize something as a tool
for eating with but you don't know
whether it's a spoon or a fork um anyway
so yes so so that we could go on and on
forever with let's go on a little longer
because there's an example there are
more that you talk about in the book
that i think are super important because
where i want to get people like my my
whole like thesis in life is to get
people to understand your brain is
creating a virtual world for you you
have a mistake in this virtual world for
the real world yes and once you
understand we're talking about umvelts
here homie we're talking about you take
the world in in a certain way which is
why the article by nagel on what it's
like to be a bat is
so fascinating it's asking you to step
outside your own umvelt into something
else's and say how fundamentally
different would this whole experience be
but what i really want people to
understand this this was a huge
breakthrough for me when i went from
having a totally fixed mindset and i
just thought life is hopeless and i
can't go where i want to go because i'm
only so intelligent and i'm just not
that bright and so i'm stuck here and i
spent a lot of time there and then began
to realize wait a second i started
reading about the brain i was like whoa
like the brain is cobbling [__] together
yeah it's keeping me from bumping into
too much stuff right and for that i am
grateful but ultimately like there's a
lot of lies being told to me by this
evolutionary machine and once i could
begin to
think through them and go oh whoa like
it's it's interpreting this it's
interpreting that what is it
interpreting that's creating an emotion
for me that isn't helpful i think people
also experience a lot of relief
from this idea that they are responsible
for all of that processing too and so
this gets into um when i when i talk
about these examples in my book i'm i'm
specifically talking about
two illusions
that i think
inform our view of consciousness which
is why i spend a lot of time on them
and one is this illusion of conscious
will
and one is the illusion of being a self
and i think that that's one place that
that relates to a lot of the work that
you do
um because this false sense of a self is
actually where a lot of human suffering
comes from and part of it is is what i
was just getting at which is that we
have this idea that you know even though
we understand that we're
brain processing you know at bottom
somehow we have a very strong intuition
that there is a me that is separate from
the brain processing
and um there can be a lot of
um guilt and regret and and things like
this that come about because of kind of
a false way of viewing
um
what in fact we are and what our
conscious experience is
so the the notion of this this self that
somehow can override whatever the brain
is doing or
um you know make make decisions
somehow i mean it's funny it's an
incoherent idea but we all have it very
strongly and we kind of assume it's
there um it's related to the notion of
conscious will
and i like to distinguish a free will
well i was just gonna say i like to
distinguish conscious will from free
will um only because free will um by my
definition is a much more complex thing
and i i we could actually talk for a
long time and i could explain why i
think there's not much freedom in free
will
um but that free will is is something
that in some sense i can agree that the
brain has it's it's a complex processing
system it's responding to all kinds of
stimuli and ideas and can can change and
mutate and and and make decisions as a
processing
device for lack of a better word
conscious will is the idea
that consciousness is the thing
that is
that is the will that consciousness is
the will
so we have again it's related to
these questions that i that i ask in the
beginning of my book
is consciousness doing something and we
feel that consciousness is behind our
willed actions when in fact there's a
lot of neuroscience to suggest that it's
it's actually the reverse that it's that
it's at the end that all this processing
happens a decision gets made and then
we're kind of the last to know um i have
a chapter in my book called along for
the ride um which can also be
distressing to people when they forget
where people get free time i i get it
too actually but and ultimately i
actually think it's very freeing and it
doesn't mean you can't so so the brain
is not in any way a closed system
um just because our conscious experience
is of what the brain is doing
um doesn't mean at all that the brain is
not influenced by ideas
um and you know and even in physical
terms as you said you can you can have a
brain tumor that will dramatically alter
what your conscious experience is um but
more importantly
for this type of discussion you know if
i yelled and said oh that that beam is
about to fall on you
that's an idea that just gets
communicated through language that
suddenly changes your brain so your
brain is as a physical system but
my words my ideas get in and it
completely changes the structure of your
brain so much that you're going to jump
up
like i could get you to jump up just by
transferring that information the thing
that i think is is a true illusion is
that consciousness comes first and
consciousness is again wrapped up in
this idea of a self so that there's this
self that's kind of floating free from
the material world somehow
and is initiating
everything that happens and i think that
is a is a false view and so we could
talk about some of those studies
um the earlier ones are more
controversial the most recent ones are
less and i think are the most
interesting actually the most recent
study that i read about
came out of germany and
so so most of these studies i should say
basically show that
at the level of the brain scientists can
see
markers or activity
that
can that that reveal to them
you're about to make a decision or make
a movement
and before you have become conscious of
it
so the most recent study was subjects
were in an fmri so an fmri is an mri
with attracts blood flow
and the subjects were given two numbers
and then given a choice whether to add
or subtract the numbers
and there's there's a special kind of
clock that's almost like a second hand
going around
a regular clock so that they can mark
that what their their job is to have the
experience of
making a decision i'm going to add or
i'm going to subtract and nowhere on the
clock that that decision happened
and then they actually go go ahead and
do the math um so through fmri
neuroscientists were able to detect up
to four seconds prior
when not only so they were able because
they could see you know different parts
of the brain they were able to detect
different types of processing they could
tell when that person would make the
decision
and what whether their decision was to
add or subtract
so that gives us a very different sense
and the truth is a lot of neuroscience
that comes to us is giving us this
picture we can't we we should
we should have digest digested this a
little bit more than than we have
already that
there is a sense in which we are kind of
just experiencing life play out
um
i don't know if i answered your question
you did i mean look this is this is the
exploration that i was hoping for what
becomes interesting to me in that is i
think part of the reason that we haven't
digested that more is what are you
supposed to do with that it's like some
part of it is okay wait it
they're they're definitely like how how
does one make sense of this okay i am
literally truly me tom billy i am
completely prepared to say that i am
simply a chemical processing plant that
runs on algorithms i have no problem
with that
but there does seem to be what i'll call
the overwatch mechanism there is some
level of awareness i'm sure my
prefrontal cortex some level of
awareness that is
watching things and saying um it through
and i'm very fine with given where i was
born and the things i've encountered and
all of that that it has built these
beliefs okay so i have sort of a default
setting but now once i have that thing
that thing can go in and make changes
so i have this sort of overwatch
algorithm processing machine that's been
built up over my experiences but it also
has the ability to self-reflect and ask
absolutely based on my value system
which is changeable by the way based on
my changeable value system
am i thinking about this in the right
way or do i want to change something
sure and it has the ability to change
now it has the ability to change that's
all we're all still talking about the
brain the the idea and i think even the
way you're describing it is partly
a shift in the way we tend to think
about it which is there's a concrete
self
um that is responsible for those changes
rather than it's all brain processing
and the brain again is not it's not
static it's not walled off from its
environment it is an ever-changing
ever-evolving
very complex system it's the most
complex thing we know of in the universe
um
but that
just the fact that
we can absorb
the idea that it is brain processing and
that our experience of how that brain
processing is functioning is not
necessarily accurate
i think is useful for
letting go of some
[Music]
i think deeply damaging psychological
ways and patterns of thought that we can
get ourselves into
but also just on the science side and on
the study of consciousness side
it can start to get us to see how
human beings and brains in in general
are possibly
not that different from other processing
systems in terms of consciousness and
other animals other animals and beyond
so it you know it opens up this window
onto
yes well beyond in both directions so
beyond as in plants um plants is
something that i that i talk about in my
book
it's crazy crazy
and and
their own children right and so actually
the reason i brought up plants in the
book was not because i think plants are
conscious although this all really makes
you wonder it was it was actually
redefining things no questions right but
it was for me it was actually to make
the opposite argument which is that
this complex behavior that we see in
plans it's much more complex than we
realize until we started studying it
um
is
very closer to and more related to human
behavior than we also previously
realized and now we know this is true
mechanistically too so in terms of the
dna um give people some examples okay so
so just to to go on this this path um
daniel chamovitz wrote this book what a
plant knows which i highly recommend
and he talks about
this collection of genes that plants
have
that evolved so that they can sense
whether they're in the light or in the
dark it's the same set of genes that we
have
for detecting light and dark and then of
course in us it's much more complex and
it's they're related to circadian
rhythms and all kinds of other things
but um
so there are behaviors that are
incredibly interesting um i can i can
talk a little bit about the underground
tree communication
i just want to make clear that the
larger point is
in my first question in my book when
we're talking about behavior behavior as
evidence of consciousness
if
we see this level of similarity in
behavior in other systems
um and
it's very hard to get conclusive
evidence of a system being conscious if
it's not a human being who can speak and
talk to you about it we have to start to
to really ask the question whether
consciousness goes much deeper than we
imagine
but actually i brought up plants because
i think it makes us
it makes a second guess whether all of
the behaviors we see in human beings
that we say has to exist
sorry consciousness has to exist for
them to be there
if we don't need consciousness if plants
don't need consciousness to exhibit
similarly complex behaviors then we
we've we've we could be thinking about
things
wrong yeah okay this is interesting i
want to go a little deeper on this so
one of the things you talk about in the
book is that plants will preferentially
send nutrients to seedlings that they
know came from them
versus other seedlings that they can
actually read that somehow yeah this is
so these are specifically douglas fir
trees in
in canada susan simard has done some
fantastic work and has a ted talk
explaining some of his work
she was studying the underground tree
inter-tree communication
mostly
facilitated through
mycorrhizal networks which are fungal
networks which is
also incredibly fascinating
where they share carbon with different
species of trees and at some times of
the year
you know the douglas fir needs more
carbon at another time of the year
another species may need and they
actually kind of send signals about when
they they're in need of carbon and share
carbon um but yes then so so seedlings
will will start to grow
and some of them have come from these
you know specific trees some of them
come from other trees but there are ways
that the she calls the mother trees can
know which
trees have sprouted from her own
seedlings which are her kin and she will
i shouldn't say she
[Laughter]
um but these mother trees will send more
carbon to their own kin
they will send
stronger defense signals this is another
thing that's actually interesting i
didn't mention that trees send defense
signals to each other as well if there's
a you know poisonous thing that's
growing in the area they they will
send
chemical signals that
warn other trees of dangerous
other dangerous species in in the area
they will send more of those signals to
their own kin
they
grow their roots differently so they'll
actually make more room for the roots of
their kin
all of these things that
to us would be behavior that gets
described as psychological behavior
and that we assume we need consciousness
for to put it very simply i'm making the
point that you can't have it both ways
um
if we're going to use these behaviors in
humans
um
to be
evidence of consciousness we then have
to question
how far down it's going and if not which
in some ways is a more interesting
question if not
then what is it
um that's different about consciousness
if we are these systems that are kind of
going along in the same way that plants
are so iv
iv is one thing that's actually very
interesting to study it changes its rate
of growth and direction depending on
something that it can it can grow around
and cling to
if those types of processes don't
require consciousness maybe we're wrong
in thinking that all of the complex
behavior in humans requires
consciousness and that there's there's
another explanation for it
and what would that other explanation be
i mean the most likely one to me is
um
that it's actually much more fundamental
and that it goes that consciousness
itself is a fundamental property of the
universe yes okay said it very well yes
and um now i want to talk about
so if it is a field like gravity
how do we
test that like how does one like right
because it at least breaking through our
intuition to get to that insight then
opens it up to
being tested yes um
because that's one word it's like okay
now i'm i'm i'm so uneducated on this
stuff like i can't tell you one way or
the other if this is plausible right but
my limited brain goes yeah that's not
possible right no me too but like me too
which is what i keep saying i'm split 50
50 on it and one reason is i mean my
intuitions go so strongly against it
it's really through breaking through
intuitions and following
logistical pathways and talking to other
scientists so i should also say
this idea that that consciousness could
be a fundamental feature of the universe
could be another in a sense another
property of matter
that exists in all matter because it's
just a fundamental property so it exists
and and again to clearly distinguish
consciousness from complex thought
these ideas in no way suggest that
atoms or electrons have any kind of
thoughts or plans or you know anything
human-like they're nothing like a human
um i sometimes will say we we wouldn't
expect a rock to write a novel or to
sing opera that's not what adam's
configured in that way do
and if there is some level of experience
associated with the atoms in iraq we
would not expect it to be anything like
what we experience it would be
completely unrecognizable to us
but all of this thinking falls under the
umbrella term of pansychism um which is
a term people should know because
historically that's the term that's been
used i don't like the term
i get it it's super woo-woo
i think i think from a scientific
perspective we can just simply work
toward
it not being taboo to ask these
questions so it should just be
legitimate to ask the question
could we come up with a theory in which
consciousness is fundamental because
it's been so difficult actually
impossible to to date to come up with a
theory of how
complexity or how processes in the brain
give rise to consciousness is it
possible it was it was there to begin
with well i'm definitely leading you
down a garden path so where i want to
get to so this is the moment in the book
where if you hadn't set me up with
something earlier i would have been like
peace crazy yeah um it was you talking
about the delayed measurement experiment
and i thought
wait a second so was this the first time
you encountered that that thought
experience yes so i knew about the
double slit experiment yay i was so
blown away my moment of awe like just
unbelievably cool to think that that i
could have existed this long and so
fundamentally misunderstand the nature
of things
so that was cool but then you took it to
like a whole another level well and by
the way physicists feel that way about
it too i mean quantum mechanics is
something that is deeply mysterious
and a tremendous source of awe and
mystery for anyone who finds that
um
you know inspiring and and fueling
there's a lot now to read because you
know progress is being made but it's
still something that
that is really dumbfounding to
scientists as well so i think if you
walk people through what the delayed
measurement experiment is then
it's been a while hopefully i can do a
good job because i just read your book
literally twice so i will fill in any
gap from your own work by the way that
you might not remember but um
the
what it will do i think for anybody
who's really listening is make you go oh
there are things i don't understand
right and once i'm in the realm of oh
there are things i don't understand then
it is quite possible while i can't
grab it from an intuition standpoint our
greatest breakthroughs in science have
always been the moment where you can
shed your
and and really see the thing for what it
is yes
um so i think we should probably start
with the double slit experiment because
many people are not familiar with that
um and if you do show notes i can i can
supply some visuals that might might
help because it is actually very
difficult to
get just through a person one person
explaining it to another but i'll do my
best
um
so
light most people know um
we our understanding is that it can act
like a particle and it can act like a
wave so there are photons um which are
the the individual particles of light
um
which have wave-like properties and
particle-like properties so so the
experiment is set up um very basically
they're they're shooting um photons one
at a time
um at a screen and in between
the photons that are being shot out and
the screen are two slits and so
if you were
going to put through a continuous light
source you would see a wave pattern on
the other side the light is kind of
going through
both slits
and
ha has a wave interference pattern um i
don't know if i need to explain more of
that that will get very complicated so
so but imagine think of the water and
the way that normally when you're if you
just have the screen there you shoot the
light through two slits what you see
when it gets record if there's
photographic material that records um
these photons you see
um
bar bars where the photons have hit
um where their
weakest or lightest at the edges um but
they're it looks as if you pushed water
through these slits in terms of how it
gets recorded
so there's there's no clean delineation
between what slit it went through
there's just a whole pattern along the
screen
which is not that is a wave that is a
wave like pattern so it has a pattern to
it but it's a pattern of a wave
so
then it turns out that if you shoot one
photon at a time and you measure which
slit each individual photon went through
you have a different pattern on the
screen and all of a sudden it looks as
if you're shooting individual pellets
and some of them go through the right
side and some of them go through the
left side and there's no interference
pattern at all they just form two slits
now right now you've already given
people enough to have their brain
leaking out of their ears so i want to
say it one more time to make sure people
understand you take these double slits
you shoot a single photon through it
don't measure it you get an interference
pattern on the back as if you have
pushed a wave through both slits yes now
do the exact same thing again but this
time put a camera up whatever measuring
device
and all of a sudden it's a single
[__] photon right that that's crazy
that's one of those where i'm like what
yes so just watching it
changes its properties right that
doesn't seem possible right so it's i
would say it's measuring it rather than
watching it and some people have have
interpreted this in ways that i think
are
we just we simply don't know the answer
but but some people have said it
requires consciousness which i don't
think we have any evidence for that at
all
but clearly some interaction with
other matter in the room
whether consciousness is present or not
absolutely has an effect and this is
this is what quantum mechanics was born
out of quantum physics
so there are many different
interpretations
of these strange things that we see
um many worlds is something that maybe
some some of your audience has sort of
string theory um has been around for
longer but they're they're you know this
is just scientists trying to to
understand what's going on here
um so the physicist john wheeler
um proposed a thought experiment based
on on this
based on
this experiment and the fact that we
know
that light so there's a
there's a phenomenon where light
goes around a quasar and causes
um
an illusion i'm forgetting the term but
an illusion of i think it's
gravitational lensing yes thank you so
if there's a quasar and in between us
and the quasar is a black hole
the the light will bend and it will give
the illusion to us that there are two
quasars rather than than one because the
light bends and causes this this
illusion to take place
his thought was
if we were to measure
which side an individual photon which
side of that black hole the individual
photon went around
that would
change that would essentially change the
past
um because that thing's been traveling
for millions of years yes so it's path
right takes place over millions of years
just by measuring it will then give it a
distinct location in the same way that
it gives a distinct location by
measuring it when it goes through the
slits but millions of years ago and so
this was crazy right
so in some sense and we don't know how
to explain this in terms of the
fundamental nature of reality and
whether this means they're are
you know endless copies of the universe
and the universe kind of splits every
time um
a quantum event happens
whether there are many dimensions of
space i mean this gets into string
theory which i'm not an expert on any of
this
i'm explaining it as best i can but i
i'm not a physicist and probably
shouldn't shouldn't be explaining
any of these
experiments but the implications um and
the results so this was a thought
experiment and then they actually were
able to do the the experiment so it was
confirmed
um that's where i literally was taking
notes in the book and i was like this
was confirmed experimentally what yeah
like
that yeah so there's something we
do not understand mentally do not
understand we don't understand about the
fundamental nature of of matter and what
matter is and what light is and these
are these are great mysteries so
um
if
when i when i
really stop and think about like what
the experience of consciousness is what
it would look like if we if pan psychism
is true and there's sort of
consciousness all the way down
what it it the question that it begs for
me is
why is consciousness as an emergent
property so problematic why where do
people get hung up because in my very
limited mind and i am very prepared to
accept this is just ignorance on my part
but when i think about
basically pansychism would postulate
something along the lines of hey you're
getting all these low levels of
consciousness and as they come together
their combinatorial effect is
it gives you some unique property and
that can manifest as a tree it can
manifest as a dolphin as a human it's
different
you know amounts of and different types
of consciousness coming together in
different cell types and all that so
it's essentially purely a biological
explanation how it manifests so
differently but why do we have trouble
with the postulation that the human
brain is an emergency phenomenon right
and that the the the lights coming on
really does feel like a grayscale to me
yeah it does not feel like one moment
there is and one moment there isn't like
if you've ever seen have you seen a baby
do you ever watch blackfish the
documentary don't it will hurt your
heart in ways i can't explain but i will
give you one cool punch line when they
um go to capture baby orcas the pod is
insanely intelligent about how they
tried to hide the babies because they
know they want the babies they already
understand that yeah they like split up
and like some swim high and some swim
low trying to hide the big yeah so crazy
and then they stay and like scream and
cry as they take the babies
it was so gut-wrenching i could not
[__] believe it so to your point
about what evidence do we need to be
like oh my god that's conscious right
i'm willing to say yo that's clearly
conscious so now let's slide down all
the way we get to ants yeah and i'll be
like eh there was there was never a
moment where it was yes no but there's
definitely the qualitative estimation of
what their experience is like
now now is so removed i don't really get
it anymore and then sure it slides on
into something i can't i can't
comprehend right where does it blink out
of existence i'm gonna guess at a
nervous system because there does seem
some need
to detect pressure you have to have some
kind of cell that sends some kind of
signal saying that i'm experiencing
pressure at even like the most basic
level so to me there it would seem yeah
and by all means shut me down at the end
no no i mean the truth is that many
scientists have that exact intuition and
and i would say most scientists think
that
um
explaining it as an emergent phenomenon
is the way to explain it and in fact
sean carroll the physicist who i just
recently spoke with that that's the way
he would describe it
um
there are there are a few reasons why
there are problems with that um
there are many ways i could take this at
this point and i know we're lit we're
limited on time
one issue is just the description of an
emergent phenomenon in science and
there are two things about it one
it is a phys it is um
something that is observed from the
outside so it's a an emergent
property is a property that you can you
can quantify from the outside
consciousness is part partly what makes
it so mysterious is that it has this
internal character that it's not
something that can be viewed from the
outside
we didn't talk about locked in syndrome
but but looking at someone with
locked-in syndrome is is a good way to
kind of jostle your intuitions
um briefly this is someone who had brain
damage um
so that they're completely paralyzed but
it has not affected their their
conscious or mental life really at all
so they have as full uh conscious
experience as you and i are having right
now um are able to to think clearly
perceive everything see things in the
room hear everything but they're
completely paralyzed so that they're
unable to communicate anything
um and the the neuroscientist anal seth
actually recently posted this this
picture that's
very interesting which is just the human
nervous system without the rest of the
body and he said something to the effect
of
this would be conscious
if it were alive
and it looks like the roots of a tree
right and i'm not saying it is it's a
very different type of system but the
truth is
we can't
necessarily get information about a
conscious experience always so we assume
because we are complex creatures and we
are are conscious we assume that it is a
complex phenomenon and we assume that
the more something is like us the more
likely it is to have consciousness i
think i think that that is um
assumption that may or may not be true
but it's it's really just an assumption
we have no evidence for that being the
case
um and seeing someone in locked-in
syndrome
tells you definitively i talk about
the the writer jean dominique baubie in
my in my book
he in this condition of locked in
syndrome he was able to
figure out a way to write his caretakers
noticed that he he in fact actually had
one
point of mobility which was his eyelid
he was able to control his eyelid and
many people unlocked in syndrome do not
have this but he happened to be able to
move his eyelid and so they figured out
how he could type out the alphabet with
certain ways of blinking and he
literally wrote this beautiful book that
was turned into a film
um in this state so but without that eye
blinking so this is a man who can write
a book and can experience everything
that's happening in his room and has no
ability to communicate so we certainly
can't rely
on
communication and behavior to tell us
how how
possible it is that there's
that there's consciousness there but
emergence so emergence is a it's a
physical phenomenon that can be
witnessed from the outside
and it's a complex phenomenon it comes
out of complexity and again we have no
evidence that consciousness is due to
complexity it very way it very well may
be and i am i am really split 50 50 on
this and the way you described it um i
completely my intuitions aligned there
and i think it's why we need to spend
some time
challenging our intuitions because the
evidence is actually not there
and
there are many reasons
to think and and and many reasons why
explaining this mystery
um
make there's a better path there seems
to be a better path to explaining it if
it's a property that already exists in
matter
um
not sure how well i answered that
question but oh well this whole yes i
mean your intuitions are are the
intuitions that most people share and
many scientists share and
yeah it's the reason i i take the time
to do as much as i can to undermine them
in the book because i think where those
intuitions are likely leading us in the
wrong direction
and at the very least we've gone in that
direction all this time and we haven't
gotten any closer to
understanding how it is that
non-conscious matter that these atoms in
the universe
that had had no consciousness all of
this time somehow come together in a way
it's it's actually when you look at the
details it's very hard to see how
the addition of an experience associated
with that processing
um
comes into being at any point why that
would be
monica i am so glad that you're
exploring this topic and that you belong
to a rare group of people that are i
think entering the public awareness more
and more that are capable of writing a
new york times bestseller and that are
picking topics that other people just
can't for their livelihood they can't
touch so
i'm so grateful that you wrote this book
i really really hope that
it in a very
enjoyable way jars people out of their
some of their intuitions and assumptions
because i really think that the base
assumptions people make about their life
and the way their mind works
holds so many people back from living a
life that could be far more enjoyable
and include far less suffering yeah um
but yeah thank you really is a wonderful
wonderful book um where can people find
you online where can they get your i'm
just my name annika harris.com
a-n-n-a-k-a harris.com um my book is
available everywhere books are
um but yeah and the best way to find out
about my work um and other work that i
do
in addition to my book is it's all on my
website so nice
all right
what is the impact that you want to have
on the world
i think bringing more ah and curiosity
i could probably i could stop i could go
on but that that that seems like a a
good one uh awe and curiosity i think we
can we can always have more of and
i will take that all day
all right guys trust me when i say that
she brings the awe and the curiosity and
what a wonderful entrance into that
world i cannot recommend her work enough
it is really extraordinary and hopefully
the success of this first book will get
her to do more and more in this vein i
guess not first book but first book
aimed at adults so very excited by what
she's doing she has a children's book
like i said earlier i wonder so be sure
to check that out as well and if you
haven't already subscribed be sure to do
so and until next time my friends be
legendary
all right thank you so much yeah thank
you it's really fun hey everybody it's
time to talk about all of our favorite
subjects mental health is there
something holding you back or preventing
you from achieving your goals or even
just interfering with your happiness do
any of you suffer from depression or
anxiety as a lot of you guys know i've
suffered from anxiety for years and
trying to tackle something like that on
your own is not always the optimal
strategy
but a lot of people are super nervous to
try out therapy or they don't really
know where to start or they're just
plain embarrassed but now there's a
service called better help that makes
therapy more accessible and affordable
betterhelp is professional counseling
done securely online using your computer
tablet or mobile phone through video
calls phone calls or text messaging with
licensed therapists who are certified by
their state's board to provide therapy
and counseling it is not self-help and
it's not a crisis line it's an online
service available worldwide and it has a
massive network of counselors who have a
broad and diverse range of specialties
so you can get a counselor with the sort
of expertise that might not even be
available in your local area
betterhelp assesses your needs and
matches you with a licensed professional
therapist within 24 hours you can log
into your account anytime to message
your counselor and betterhelp also has
group in our sessions every week where
members can learn in groups directly
from licensed counselors on multiple
topics like relationships and ways to
overcome anxiety especially if the
thought of seeking help makes you
nervous or embarrassed be sure to check
out the over 60 000 positive reviews
posted on the betterhelp site and that's
betterhelp h-e-l-p
betterhelp is committed to making it
easy for you to access the therapeutic
help you need even if you have never
gone to counseling before it's free to
switch therapists it's more affordable
than local therapy and they even have
financial aid available if you need it
betterhelp wants you to start living a
happier life today visit betterhelp.com
impact and again that's spelled better
h-e-l-p and join over 500
000 people taking charge of their mental
health with the help of an experienced
professional better help costs just 65
dollars per week and financial aid is
available for those who qualify during
the sign up process
as an impact theory viewer you can get
10 percent off your first month so visit
betterhelp.com
impact and get the help you need today
all right guys if you need this one
please give it a shot take care and be
legendary
i mean first you can notice that anxiety
isn't even that unpleasant it's so close
to excitement in its actual physiology
that really the difference between
excitement and anxiety is more
or less just the the framing it's just
the story you're telling yourself you
know if you felt